start the recording, you know, make it bigger. So
deal with all this video and audio I presume. Yeah, yeah. Just doing the video of the screen.
Perfect. Yeah, I've got I've got a whole bunch of questions, a whole bevy of stuff.
Just to start with, I know that, at least from what I saw, it looked like you started in this
role in 2021. Yeah, that's, well, formally, I started for the archive in 2022 or 2023.
But at sound and vision, I've been employed for over five years. Yeah.
Okay. So you didn't start at the, as the game's archivist, is that a role that
evolved or how did that come into? Yeah. So to understand that, you need to
understand sound and vision a little bit more broadly, I suppose we are a, the National
Archive for Audio Visual Media in the Netherlands. That means that we are working closely with
the national public broadcasters to make sure we can preserve radio and television. And we are
not a government organization. We are primarily funded by the government, but we are a separate
foundation. So similar to, if you GHF, we don't need donations in that sense, but we are always
working for new methods and ways to preserve things. And so when I, when I got here to
games, preservation program was already running that had begun back in 2017, formally. And we
had someone working on that and they didn't have full dedicated hours for it. They were having like
one day a week and then three other days for other stuff. And I started in 2021 specifically for
the redesign of our museum. So aside from us being an archive, we are also a public museum and we
are also a research institute. So we are a space looks gorgeous. Well, yeah, we have over 400
employees. So to kind of give you the width of like how big our organization is, we are very large
in that sense, comparatively. And so the games preservation program was already running. I
came in in 2021 to start on the museum, because our newly designed museum had a section dedicated
to films, television, but also video games. And they were looking for someone with an expertise
in video games. And I read the application and was like, that's everything except my name. So
that's how I applied, got in as a games expert. I helped out with the museum. And when the museum
was nearing its completion, I decided to shift to the archive, because I wanted to stay around and
do video games for as long as I could. And that worked out great. And so I've been here ever since
working on the archive for the Dutch video games. There's a lot of parts of that that make a lot
of sense. I happened to know just a little bit about the Netherlands structure. I got to study
abroad there last year, studying the libraries and museums of the area. And so that's cool. Totally,
I partially understand how the museum funding structures work within the Netherlands,
because it's just a fascinating process. I got to kind of see it firsthand to what extent
video games carved their space into that the the National Video Game Museum that's in
right. Yeah, remember the city. It's a small place, but it's so cute there. I love that spot.
But yeah, that that is an arcade that is functionally an arcade. But as a museum space,
it means that they get national funding to help out with some of the parts. And I'm talking to the
people who work there. They also have a little bit extra where services that they provide.
They can, they can kind of gain different money from various services that they put together.
So thinking on that, is that a thing that you've got to do where you've gotten to develop services
around video games over the last few years? Yeah, that's that's just curating a collection.
We're going to get to that. But yeah, my first thought is just like, what kind of services
can you use video games leverage that excitement for to to build up a space? That's very interesting.
So our our Institute works on multiple levels in our primary goal and function is that radio
and television television archive. Like that is our function. That's what we get our money for.
The things we do on the side, like the museum, research projects, other ways of making revenue
that goes back into the Institute. And so formally, my work isn't covered by the 70% of
our budget that is funded by the government, but the additional 30% that's how my project is funded.
And it's also embedded into the organization. So I'm not on a temporary project or contract.
This is part of our Institute, but it's funding wise that works a little bit differently,
which means that we don't need to put out requirements or requirements or deliverables to external
organizations. We don't need to do video game repairs. We don't need to do consulting or that
sort of thing. We are a public Institute, and that is our primary function. So I can just focus
mostly on acquiring materials for a collection and reaching the collection, keeping the collection
playable, and also documenting a lot of our research and processes and keeping contacts
with the Dutch games industry and developments. Oh, okay. Yes, that is that opens a whole
can of worms before we even get into collection stuff. Yeah, keeping in touch with the Dutch
games industry. Yeah, does that because that's the part I don't know a lot about. It was
when I went to the Netherlands, I looked into that it was it was impenetrable to fuck out like
what is really I just I was that was a bit struggled with. I was based in Amsterdam.
Oh, man, it would have been I would have gotten you everywhere. And that's so that's such a shame
for you. Yeah, no, I was looking through the the university side. So I ended up getting to
interface with direct and awesome. Yeah, you all spur of office? Yeah, we're in a class.
We got there. They were my former professors at the University of Utah when I did game
studies as a minor. I was wondering I was wondering because there's just
a lot of the things that I've gotten to do and study over with my undergrad a decade ago and now
is kind of just rotated around Jasper. Yeah, makes sense. But yeah, no, I want to know what
does that look like for you interfacing with that because that's one of the few things that we
could actually accomplish in the US. Right. As games librarianship is is not really a thing.
There's not really games archivists that could be paid through the same kinds of structures,
but there are groups that can independently interface with like for me in Seattle,
the Seattle Indies is just a bedrock of really important stuff. Yeah, super resourceful.
Does that so come across for you? How do those connections get made?
So it works on two levels, I can tell you. And the second one goes back to policy. So I'll leave
that for a little bit. But the first one is our connections to the Dutch Games Association,
which is the Federation for developers themselves within the Netherlands.
Because the Netherlands is so small, it is very easy to get in touch with anyone. Like,
it is it is always like one one to add most two tiers removed. So it's not that hard to get
in touch with people. But what was harder in the beginning, especially, was getting people to
accept us doing this work alongside developers. The thing is because we are so closely attached
and perceived to be next to the public broadcasters, there was this preconceived notion that we were
very much like reinforcing the biases from established mainstream media. So like, why would we collaborate
with an institute who has been kind of helping to determine that games are like only for boys,
cause violence, cause addiction, right? That's not something we would like to collaborate with.
So our personal outreach to the Dutch Games Association and developers was essential in us
getting a foot in the door to make them understand like, no, we are not part of like the public
broadcasters. We are a separate organization and we want to preserve your work as part of Dutch
cultural heritage. So our approach was a lot broader in that sense. Like it was very much like,
we're not going to tell you to do something. There's no legal law requiring us to do this.
We think it's important because it tells you something about our cultural heritage
in the Netherlands and games are part of that. So that was really the reason when I was starting
when I was like, okay, we should really talk to developers and get them to understand what
we're doing just in part to prepare them for when 50 years down the line, they have projects that
are done, but cannot be preserved. So we want to kind of plant those seeds in advance to make
sure that they know what to do, who to reach out to, and what our role is within that larger ecosystem.
So it's very much a...
The Seattle IDs, yes.
Yeah, and again, our advantage here again is the Netherlands is so small. So when we reach out to
just Games Association, they were holding monthly network lunches. I could get in touch
with developers. They have a yearly annual event called Indigo, which was also a very good way
to meet people. We went to Gamescom as part of a delegation to kind of show like, hey, we are
making the moves, we are not just observing. And of course, you know, I'm playing Games
myself. I keep an eye out for what's happening. I write about Games as a journalist in my spare
time. So I can kind of combine those layers into reaching out to people that I think, hey, you're
making something interesting. Let's talk. Have you considered preservation?
And 99% of what I'm going for. Sorry, I said that side.
Actually, I write for an American outlet called Nintendo World Report, which is the US website.
Actually, one of the oldest Nintendo websites around. I think John Reardon actually does video
editing for the VGHF. Phil and Frank will know him for sure. And then in the Netherlands, I also
write for another more national outlet on a freelance basis. Yeah, it's just a side gig,
because I like, I can do this full time. So it's for me. It's got the imagination.
Yeah. Yeah. I'm glad I don't need to depend on it for my livelihood, so to speak.
So when we got in touch, it took quite a while of massaging them into understanding what we
wanted to do and how we wanted to achieve it. But once that got rolling, it really helped as long
term, because people now recognize us, they know us, they know what we do. We've been very
much waving a flag to be as visible as possible, which helps us in being approachable, like people
know who to reach out to. And even when our general help desk downstairs gets an email like,
hey, we want to do something with games preservation, they know to reach to me or my colleagues,
so that helps out a lot as well. Getting to ask them, prompt them for this, then getting your
response immediately. I was like, thank goodness. Yeah. Yeah. People know how everywhere else.
No, I get that. And I try to be very visible. And the thing is like, we are also a very,
very small cop within this larger Institute, right? So we have over 420 employees, I believe,
and only three of us are working on games and only I'm the only one who can do it full time.
So there's still like a layer of like people understanding us or not understanding what we do
and when to reach out to us. So in that regard, since there is one or you full time and three
inside of large space. Yes. How do you divvy up different assignments? So I figure you're in
charge of the crew. How do you balance all of the work that you have between things and what does
that look like? So the fun thing is I'm not actually in charge of the crew. So we have
on a hierarchy level, we have above everything else, our curator who decides what we do,
what we focus on, what the goals are. And they kind of maintain a high level overview.
We don't have a curator dedicated to just games. Their portfolio is more entertainment and culture.
So that's very broad. That includes both archiving things that are relevant to TV shows, to radio
shows, but also to religion, to when a celebrity dies. Also video games, right? It's very high level.
During the last reorganization, they decided that they wanted to have vertical conservators,
not just on a single topic. So we don't have a TV or a radio curator, but we have one for news.
We have one for amateur productions. We have one for culture and entertainment. So that helps to
kind of make it more high over. It also puts a lot on their plates. So there's a lot of levels to it
as well. So that's our high level theory. So you can fit game stuff into multiple different
verticals, right? Right. So if you have an applied game or a game that uses news as a topic,
it wouldn't go to the news curator, right? It would help to stay within one structure in that sense.
Because the political games, yeah, collection. In other, yeah, with other creators in other
organizations, they might be divvied up to different people. And here, because games are
malleable, media is malleable, we try to take and compost that as well. So that's our high level
curator. Then underneath that is our coordinator. He coordinates our digital preservation effort.
So he's also responsible for web archival podcasts, web videos and games. So he's very much like
making sure that we do our tasks, that we reach our goals, that we set realistic achievements for
the year. And that's so on we work on. And then there's me and my colleague Amy doing the actual
work and then Amy mostly helps with the administrative part and as well as reaching out to developers,
but also just helping out on the side with acquisitions. So physical materials that we get,
she helps with organization. And I'm the one doing the technical things. I help with the
emulation, they're reaching out to developers, contacting, keeping warm connections to everyone,
and then also doing a lot of public speaking and telling about our work. It's a advocacy part of.
Yeah, exactly. And we all kind of rotate in between those tasks as well. But formally,
that's the hierarchy. And it kind of helps us to remain focused on things so we don't just
accept everything because I'm the tendency to say yes to everything and my coordinate is like,
does it fit? And I'm like, no, but it's cool. And then yeah, you need that sort of thing to
keep your collection to have an overview of your collection. I don't like it, but there's a reason
for it. Yeah. And so that means that you're put into the web archivist section. Yes, is that
because it's expected that games are going to be digital, digitally born in a way that they can
be used via the web. Not necessarily to be used via the web. They are separate in that sense,
like separate approaches, separate structures, like we don't use the web archiving tools for
our games preservation. Those are entirely separate. But I am part of both teams, right? So I also
help out with web archival. I help web with broadcast archival. And there's a lot of overlapping
there, but there's also a lot of distinctions. That makes sense. Okay. All right, then let's
let's talk collection because cool, because talk about the games. Before we do anything,
I will send you our major thing that that has helped us. And you might have seen it already.
Google Translate actually does a pretty decent job for this one in English. So back when we started
in 2017, we were very much like, okay, we're just going to do Dutch games from the Netherlands with
a clear Dutch connection, because there's no point in archiving Super Mario Brothers as well,
if everyone else already does it. We are of the belief that if every country archives their own
games, you have all the video games in the world preserved. So how do you go about this? And how
do you make sure that people understand it who've never thought about archival? And that's where
this idea came in, which is a game's canon. So this is the canon. I love this. We did not make
this canon. We asked journalists, people from the industry, the researchers from the universities
as well, to give their input on, hey, what are the most important or significant Dutch games?
And this gave us a list of about 70 games. We published it and then people got very mad and
upset because we left certain things out. So we updated it in 2018. So it's pretty outdated
at this point. We're not getting mad as like, as a first-party person, like you didn't put our
game in or were they getting mad for a game that they were a fan of? So on two levels, yes,
yes, that and yes, that also. But also there were people like, you you excluded a lot of the
more artistic or applied games, which are very important too, which was necessarily an overview,
but they are harder to keep track of, right? So when we when we got the final list now,
I think everyone will always have their complaints that people want to be on the list.
But for us, it's very much a point of reference. And for us, it was also the way to kick open their
door. It was very much saying like, hi, we want to preserve games. Also, your list is what your
game is one of the most important in Dutch games history. We would like to archive it.
And that's how people were like, oh, but my game, really? And that's how we were able to
fundamentally start beginning that collection. So this list is still our approach. It's still
our main focus to collect all these games. And everything else on the site, we catch as well,
we try to catch as well, but these are like our milestone, so to speak. And if they're on this list,
they aren't necessarily yet archived, we are still working towards it. But this is very much a
point of reference for both publicly and ourselves. So if you scroll through that list, you can also
see that if you click on one of the titles, you can add your memories to the game. So if you,
Topraffy Nederland has a comment of someone says like, oh, this was on the elementary school
computer at the end of the hallway, and we could play it for an hour. We really want to encourage
that because people that are memories are just as relevant to this collection policy as well.
What do they remember about this game? Because that's often what gets lost if you have the
final product. So we really wanted to make it a sort of interactive experience in that sense too.
This has sort of been our cheat code, but it works really well still, talking to especially
larger organizations and publishers who may have gotten the rights to games that they didn't
intentionally even know of that were important or significant.
This is an amazing list. I love how dense it's getting on the more recent end.
Yeah, yeah, that's the issue. That's what people remember more accurately, right?
And it also looks like it looks light on the earlier end in a weird way.
Yeah, and that's also because there's very little documentation because the problem with
metalins in particular is that we're kind of ahead of the curve in a lot of computer developments,
like a lot of Dutch programmers all over the place got in very early and either moved to
international companies, or you would never know they were Dutch with their final product.
So for us, it's still the case. Yeah, it's pretty much still a way to like,
I would love to be proven wrong that our oldest game is from 1980 because we contacted the guy
who made the first game on the list, which is Nijmez Amatur. It's a text adventure game based
in the city of Nijmez, and you have to put in text and walk around. And we reached out to
them and we're like, you made the oldest Dutch game. And he's like, what? No, I did that in a
weekend for a hobby. What are you talking about? You want to art? This is not cool. Why do you want
this in a museum? This is trash. And we're like, no, this is cultural heritage. But so far,
we have yet to find an earlier Dutch, like directly Dutch game. So as far as we are concerned,
until someone proves us wrong, I would love to be proven wrong and find older.
Did you have you gotten to see about all the moon child stuff? Oh, yeah, because the fun
things I know met in person, met in lives like 500. And I was the one who pushed him like, hey,
have you seen Blue's guy blowing up? And he was like, wait, what? It was very funny. They're doing
great. I'm so glad. Great. Because yeah, that what you were describing is exactly how it felt
when never met and would post something. Just anything felt like a bewildered,
not even joy. Like that Dutch thing of like, I have a job I have to do now.
Yeah. And the fun thing is this list contains, I think, like two games from Team Hoi and neither
of them are moon child. And I would add that moon child should probably now be included in this
list because of its revival. It's an unreleased game, though, right? Yeah. Well, they have no,
they have made a final version of the game. And they also made it publicly available now. And
met in less yesterday was like, okay, I actually got the old programming team together. And we
might make a new port. And here are the open source files and go nuts and do whatever you want. And
yeah, like they're great. But that's more than enough than to put into the collection.
Yeah. And the thing is like, met in especially, met in has always had an eye for preservation. So
he's maintained his own internet archive for years, like everything they ever worked on is
already on there. So when we asked, can we have a copy of that? He's like, yeah, no problem.
I say, here, here you go. Here's your wheat trends from like, okay, yeah, that's that works.
It's been a very funny week. My old editor in chief at Games Line interviewed met in yesterday.
It is going to have something tomorrow about it. So it's just like small world.
Very small. Yeah, it's very small. Yeah. And met in is great. And that sort of sense.
We're still trying to find one of their games that's actual Lost Media, which is a lot harder
to find because they made it for an Amiga computer for a broadcaster. And they were
convinced it was their own Amiga. But now in hindsight, they're like, Oh, no, it was there Amiga. So
we're pretty sure that the game has never been copied to anything else. And we only have like
a commercial showcasing the game one juice chase. They're on a duck chase for a for an Amiga somewhere.
Yeah. And especially for a game that was only used in a game show as a promotional material,
where if you would win, you would win your length in jars of peanut butter, it's very funny.
That's so good. Yeah, again, small history, but it's very, very unique.
So I'm looking at this whole collection. And so what parts are you collecting on here? Is it
game material? Is it development process stuff? Yes, is the answer.
No, we're trying to go. Yes. So I guess one way to put it is like, I see hidden folks on here,
fantastic series that spawns a whole lot of culture out of it. And then I also see Horizons
Zero Dawn. Those are very different scales of production. Yeah. So primary goal is always the
game, the game in playable form. If that is our actual end goal, whether that is a DRM-free PC
build that we can run locally or a version that we can emulate, our goal is because they're
digital born, we do digital preservation. So we don't try to get a PlayStation 4 and run Horizon
on that. We want a PC version of game now, thankfully they have one. But we are trying to make sure
that we get a version that we can run on our PC or we can store in cult storage until we can
emulate it. Because our perceptions, these games are in the end, very basically ones and zeros. So
they should be preserved as ones and zeros. However, well, you preserve physical materials,
it will deteriorate even with our faults that we have downstairs, which are very well-climate
control, very well-preserved. In the end, it will not run. Or people will die who can repair
materials and repair circuit boards. Materials like parts themselves will not be available.
So to prevent that from happening, we are really working in advance to make sure they preserve
digitally. Okay. Then... Oh yeah, keep going. Does that include a played game experience or like a
played version of the game? I figure that's the next place I always look is if there's any video,
archive to go with the game. So high-level game, then everything else we do, we call context
tool materials. And that is divided into two sections. The one hand is the section from
developers themselves. So we ask developers, hey, aside from the game, is there anything else you'd
like to donate to us or want us to preserve? And then we kind of wait and see. We do some suggestions,
game design documents, concept art, insights, development videos, processes, marketing materials,
merchandise. We cast the white net, and whatever they feel like preserving, they can send us our
way. Then on the other hand, what we also do is video game recordings of our games so that people
can get a sense of how the games are played in action. We don't want to rely on video recordings
because games are interactive experiences. And the way I played will never be someone else's experience.
Even in linear text games, like that will not be the same. But it's more so to give people a look
at how the game runs, how it should operate, and what it does to make sure that we can keep it
in a playable form. So it's kind of our, it can be as a base reference material down the line,
but it can also be just as a way for us to showcase it through the archive because our archive as
well is not designed to showcase playable video games. It's designed for radio and television.
So we have to rely on video, audio, visual media at some point. Which actually matters a whole lot
more than we may even take credit for. I'm an old school let's player. That's that's kind of where
I cut my teeth as a kid. And so seeing how the preservation scene has adopted, like how important
those videos are over time. It's been really cool to see like just differences in how people
played a game 10 years ago versus how they would, you know, perform a game on the live stream or
something now. Yeah. And just to clarify, yeah, just to clarify, it's a it's a single recording,
like we don't ask multiple people to play and record it. We just do it one time to kind of get
a reference to sort of an overview. We are also looking at collaborating with the home computer
museum, which is based in Helmholtz, which is an awesome place if you ever get the chance.
And they also do a lot of fun projects. And they have a lot of original hardware and they've
offered to record videos on the original hardware. So we use our emulation basis and they can use
their original hardware. And maybe people want to compare that down the road. Like again, I I'm
not a researcher in that sense. I just want to provide the materials that people can use to
their own productions. That makes that makes sense though. It manifests as this final,
you know, just a raw what does the game look like as a plays? How does it run? And then that
makes sense because of all of the different places that your Institute has video access,
just to put things on walls to give things to users to let people see this in action in motion.
It's very funny how just it does line up to be an active preservation as well
of an and access and all of the other things. That's cool. Yeah. So the part that I
picked up that I thought was really interesting is that you do have kind of a list in your head of
developer materials that you're looking for. And that you can just very quickly be like,
hey, do you got any marketing material? Do you have any design materials? Do you have any concept
art? And that those really are like the main pillars of things that I would also be expecting
or looking for if I were trying to curate games. And occasionally what we have.
Yeah. And but usually this like our process doesn't just happen in a week, right? It's
usually month long talks chatting with people, seeing what they want, what they have, how they
can collaborate with us. So occasionally they just say, Oh, I found this in my attic and do you want
it or do you want me to toss it out? So at some point we were talking with someone who was a
previous developer on a very large, it was supposed to be a world of Warcraft killer called Chronicles
of Spellborn. It's an MMORPG that went offline in seven, seven months. So
concords that weren't that run. Hey, now, no, we did have seven years of development in the
Netherlands and it released in 2007, 2008. So it's very much earlier period, fixed time for the
Wow killer, especially. Yeah, and the large investor was also like a property owner. So he
had like, he was not into games and all these like, Oh, yeah, I will fund this weird thing. And it
might make me tons of money. It did not. But what's interesting is like, one of the old developers
came to us like, Hey, I have a version of the game, you can have it. Also, when the studio
closed down, we had the art pits and people were like, we're going to toss this out who wants some
and you just breadth 40, like pieces of concept art. He donated them to us as well. So we have
original drawings from these games, our concept drawings. And we put them in, we saved them in
the archive, we procured. Even though we are still waiting for full permission to archive the game
itself, because that is a separate trajectory, we're still exploring. But until then, yeah, we
definitely want to safeguard this. And if by the end, we're not allowed to put it in the archive,
then we will have to get rid of it some other way, because we do follow very strict policy
guidelines, that sort of thing. Okay, I'm looking at all the other questions that I've got. We've
actually covered the Brazilian of them rapid fire real quick.
Yeah, and feel free to ask if you need anything else. Like, so like I said, the list,
the games, common list kind of lists, how many games we want to archive. But currently in our,
I'm pulling up my current overview, we currently have about 368 games in our collection.
Oh, wow. And that's all Dutch games, right?
Yeah, Dutch games are with an explicit link to the Netherlands. And additionally, what's
important to that is that the way we archive and preserve materials, it's only with the full
explicit permission from the rights holder. So it's not necessarily even the developer.
We have a special contract that we make them sign, which allows us to reuse the materials
within our walls so people can play the materials on site. They can access the materials on site,
we're not allowed to redistribute it or make it available for download. We don't want that,
we don't do that. And we work like, we always say we're the best boy in class,
we really try to make sure that we don't, you know, don't do anything that would cause
eyebrows to be raised because we really wanted this to be proper. And it also has to be preserved
for 400 years or more. Like we are really looking long term ahead beyond public domain and copyright.
We want to make sure that this is similar to how a Rembrandt's painting would be preserved in a
museum or collection. People need to have it available for research and access.
Oh, really? Does that, does that come across for developers in the Netherlands? Because I don't
think a thought like that has ever crossed anyone who's making a game. And that's, since we don't
really have a deep art history like that. Yeah, that's what we need to explain every time. It's like,
no, what you made in a weekend for fun is actually part of our cultural heritage. And in 400 years,
people want to understand and study that. So think about it, consider it. Which is also why
we're now working with smaller indie developers, where we say this very early on. And figuratively,
we say here's a big cardboard box. Everything you use during development, you toss into the box.
By the end, you give us the box. We filter the materials on what's usable, what is personal,
and what you want to return. And then we say, we would like to add this to the archive. Is that
okay? That is like very figurative, sort of the image we're trying to sketch to these developers.
But we've had any developers that have been so kind to work with us. And they gave us also earlier
builds of their game. They gave us a gray box prototypes. They gave us every lead up to the
development because they're like, yeah, we have these materials. They're going to disappear. Otherwise,
maybe you guys can do something with that. And like, yeah, we're going to try. I mean, for us,
that's new ground as well. Like, for most too much, how do you manage that?
Yeah, so that's just very much like, saving, documenting and making sure that all these materials
are stored in a similar principle. The good thing about working in our archive is that we have the
formal infrastructure of it. So everything we put on our storage is bits preserved to the bit.
So that's, you know, I don't have to do that. It's just drag and drop and the archive infrastructure
does it for me. So that's really useful. But like I said, the archive itself doesn't eat .exe
files, so to speak. So we really have to, like, repackage it and make sure that we can say, like,
this is the game itself and is the material around it and that we can make sure that that is properly
communicated. So we do our best to preserve that on the high level as well. For one studio,
we work with, we got their entire SVN backup, which is their server that had been running since
2004, including all their canceled projects and pitches for projects that were never released.
So and that is from projects that were dedicated for mobile flip phones from the early 2000s era
to we switch era. It's a lot. There's demos in there for we, there's also development kit material
in there for we that I don't know how to use because we don't have the hardware, right? But
all the documentation is there and it's just a wonderful insight. It's also 580 gigabytes of data.
It's going to say, yeah, just just going through that material is an effort in and of itself. We
had an intern who we asked to formally work with us to make sure that this can be sort of managed
or inventor, inventor categorized. And in the end, they were like, yeah, never do it like this again,
because this is just unmanageable for anyone who's a human, which, you know, fair, but we still
try to preserve it as best as we can because there's logs in there from 2006 where every
changelog was edited to the game and you can kind of see, I fixed the clouds. Oh, no, I broke
the mountains. Oh, no, my sprites don't work. And you can have a full sort of log of how development
proceeded, which is really valuable during the we era. We era, but also during the
so this was we were in particular 2009 ish, but we also have a game that's earlier the
size stuff. Yeah, there's a there's a lot in there, which is really, really interesting. These
developers were very, very prominent in that period. And then, you know, now they're like,
yeah, this is the stuff we still have it running, but like, it wasn't the blah. No, this is two
tribes, actually, who did Tokyo story on Game Boy? Okay, yeah, the block crew, we had to go to THQ
actually for that because they bought, they bought the rights from the HKU students. And it
took me three years. And then I just had one meeting 15 minutes and they said, cool, what do we need
to sign? I'm like, excuse me, I've been working on this for three years. And you're just saying,
okay, yeah, okay. And we got the right for the original demo that the students made and the
game design documents for the original blob as well, which formerly the students have nothing to do
with it. But you can compare the demo to what the game design document was from the blue tongues,
I think in Australia, that the final game for we, and then we also got the we game in the port
of PlayStation 4 and the blob two as well, which is nice to have like not required for us, but it's
just good to have it all encompassing part of the archive. I loved the blobs. Oh, it's great.
I was like, that's such a good. I spoke from both the Netherlands and the one at THQ and the THQ
person was like, yeah, I was really missed because we wanted to make it a full-fledged IP.
And I had this idea for a multiplayer online game where you had to paint the walls. And they said,
no, we're not going to do that. And then three years later Splatoon came out. Yeah, that's sort
of thing, right? Yeah, that makes so much sense. Good stuff. Yeah, the vlog is so imminently IP
ready. And it always was and and they still own it fully like THQ can do whatever it's just like,
no, yeah, what? Yeah, it's too late now, but also it is such a brilliant little thing.
Yeah, so, okay, I want to come back around to SVG. The big 500 gigabyte
yeah, competitive of the SVR.
So when you get something as big as that, when you get something as thorough as that,
you can't archive all of the pieces. How do you get it into a position to where it
can be worked on later on? Like, how do you do like little step pieces to get into that?
So for this one in particular, we really did a lot of that documentation through our
for the intern that we asked to work on this project. So we kind of sorted the project.
We sorted the server based on projects first. So you know, okay, this is a canceled game.
This is the documentation for that game. And then we have like
documents, images, pictures, and then builds, for example, that would be the sort of structure
we would keep. And then a little per project basis, but even then it got out of hand quickly,
because there's just a zoom. Yeah, because that should make a lot of sense. And that should work.
But then there's just so much, there's so many pieces going back and forth across the server.
It's all honesty. This is one we're still kind of struggling with, because when we got the final
report from the intern as well, they told us like, yeah, we should look this over. And it's kind of
still something where we're, I wouldn't say postponing because we know we have it securely stored somewhere.
So it is safe, but making it accessible saying to people like, oh, you can, you can go nuts with
this one was very much like, maybe this one, we will be. So it also taught us to be a little bit
more hesitant to do that full request from someone. And to give you a little bit of contact, like the
two tribes guys were very hard to reach initially, like very hard to convince to do something. And I
was partly because the one who did the public outreach was very approachable, but he said
all the materials with the other guy. And the other guy was just like, yeah, I don't have time.
And then finally, he come, he comes over, we do our whole field, we explain it, he brought some
physical items, which is very nice. And we show him our workstation. And he's like, what do you need?
I'm like, I need builds for these nine games, because those are the games you released. And he's like,
great. What about the other ones? I'm like, excuse me. And then when that's when he goes into like
all the canceled projects. And he's like, you know what, I don't want to bother with this.
Here's our SVN connection. I'm going to copy everything to you guys. And then you can
figure it out, right? I'm like, yeah, that's kind of sort of like, oh, no, I was not expecting
this. But in the end, it did work out. The thing is, with that particular approach,
he also send us pretty much all the source codes. And we cannot do anything with that. Because
as I've always been explained, again, I'm not a programmer. So for me, it's always a different.
But I've always been told like, it's like hieroglyphs. You cannot decipher it. And if you can,
you need someone specialized in the code to work with it. They gave us their engine. They had
their own engine that could recompile the game. She's like, oh, you've got everything you need.
So you can recompile the games yourself. I'm like, wait, no, no, I can't wait. And then when we got
that stuff, the server was looking for a connection that it couldn't make to the compiler. So we couldn't
compile the game. So in the end, I had to get him back and it's like, okay, give us the actual
final builds of these projects, because otherwise I can't do it.
So formulating for me, because I my two bases of theory on on games, archival ship come from
Lane Noonie talking about indies, you put it in a box. And then Garrett Friedley talking about
this exact thing that is just I have no idea about it. And so now you explaining it's like, oh,
oh, that's what he was warning us about.
Yeah. And the thing is like, it can work, but you need to manage your scope. And in this particular
case, it was a game studio that I've been active for over 14, 15 years, and I've done so much that
was unknown to a lot of people. Like, okay, so when we talk Nokia video games, right? The first
thing people think of Snake, right? Yep. Yep. Do you remember one generator? I don't know if you're
in the same age gap as I am, but there's a generation later, you have this golfing game, right? Pro
golf tour. It was in color, semi blackberries and stuff at that. Yeah, two tribes made that.
And they were never allowed to talk about it. And no one knows about it, but they have the full
documentation for their golfing game that was pre-installed on every Nokia phone after 2003,
which is crazy to me. But like, that's the most great game in the world, maybe like one of them,
like it's one of those like, Oh, so many people must have done that. No one knows about it. And
they were like, yeah, we did that for a contract that we can't tell about it. We have a lot of
materials for that now. So that's, you know, that's the layers you're working in where your scope is
just undefined until you're very sure that someone knows what you want and what you get,
and how to preserve that. And that's kind of how our approach works. Like, if we ask for a specific
company or developer to work with us, we already kind of know what to expect or we give those,
hey, these are things we might expect or would like to have. If you have them, please send them to us.
Most of the time, we think they're manageable. And then you get one of these outliers that also
teaches us, okay, we need to do this a little bit differently. Okay, so most things are manageable,
though. That's interesting. Because at the front end, before that context,
before that first contact, we all have already narrowed that scope because we don't just send
out a contract blindly and it's like, Hey, work with us. We already kind of have, like,
bated, asked, like, Hey, what do you have? What do you think you have? And usually when you start
talking with people in person, they're like, Oh, wait, I remember this. Oh, I think we still got
this somewhere. And if I don't, I'll ask a friend who worked with me on it, right? That's very much
how it tends to go. So narrow the scope beforehand. And by the end, you can kind of keep the leverage
going. And the game is always our primary target, right? It's always the game first.
Everything else is by fun additional things to catch. That's that's nice to have, but not
required to keep the games playable. Okay, that's interesting that just how well it has worked for
you. Because everything that I've seen in the Netherlands history of games is a little different
from the other places that I've gotten to look at. Like Australia's history on games has a lot of
very distinct eras, where it's like, all right, this is when Sega was there, and then this is when
everything exploded. Like the Seattle area has this very like a balanced thing that it kind of goes
through. But but that owns very consistent, very consistent, like a stream of games that reach a
bunch of different eras, a bunch of different styles, a bunch of different consoles. And so
you're not really working with the same types of material every single time.
I let me show you something. I share with you a presentation I gave a few years. Oh my god,
do you accept me? Those materials like five minutes before this. I'm like,
yeah, sorry, sorry for being a bit late on it. It's been acting. Oh, no. This slide in particular.
So this is just a like a grasp of what we have in the collection, right? And these are just games
everyone would say, Oh, they're for PC and whatever. These are all different systems that have different
requirements. These were all created mainly by the same studios. So you can see the width of like
things they worked on for different systems for different versions. But that also is kind of the
challenge with particularly in our audio visual archive where the focus is just like, Oh yeah,
you do film and television and radio and those have unified standards, but games don't, right?
We have to tap. Well, and that's one of our challenges as well. But yeah, if you look at this,
like this is from our downstairs archive catalog, we don't know that many physical games, but that's
not our point, right? But it shows you just the way what we go through. For example, here is the
bomber cyberpunk team that's team reptile. They're based in Hillsome 2. And they have
records of music, which is fun to have like we don't do anything with them. But we do want to archive
them to show, Hey, these games were so popular with their music. So we want to showcase them
alongside their their publications because people want to them for their music as well.
Yeah, and and scope is also weird because we also include like stuff like this was a free
so when you go to the supermarket here occasionally they have like these promotional things,
collectible cards and stuff. And this was like an educational game about dinosaurs that was
given up at over time. Yeah. And they had a VR goggles and then an interactive game where if
you were to look at these glasses similar to AR technology, right, there would be this little
dinosaur running around. We want we have this on the list. We want to archive this. How do you go
about it? Do you store the VR hardware with the cards? Do you want the book as well? Do you just
want the software? That context is very important to us as well. So we need promotional materials
for these as well commercials, like how was this developed? Who made this? Yeah. And you're right
because this is an Albert Heim based thing. So that experience specifically is as as important
as the product itself. Yeah. Just because that's the context that people like recognize it in.
It's fun. That's a funny issue. Because we don't commit ourselves to a single platform or a single
type of game, we do everything as long as it's Dutch and as long as it's false within our scope.
There's a lot of varied stuff in our collection. One of my favorites is actually Underground,
which was developed for the Wii U. It's a game made by Rennel Games and it's designed to help
surgeons train their surgical skills. So it comes with this giant accessory when you hold it with
the big claws. It is a video game museum. Yeah, it's great. But it was not sold in Europe as a
package, right? In Europe, you could only get the game digitally and whatever. And so the developer
still had one around. So they send us both the Wii U and the hardware and the stuff around it.
So we could capture it properly and archive it. But that required us outside the box thinking as
well. Like, okay, what do we do? Now we need the game in physical. It's own physical hardware.
Like we need to record it and preserve it as best as we can. But it is stuck on that single machine,
right? Because it needs the accessories to a certain extent as well. There's layers to this.
Every project is different in that sense. No matter what.
Okay. Yeah. So lots of lots of really cool, exciting ideas there. Before I get into policy stuff,
I saw that there are videos on the YouTube that come out almost daily. Oh, yeah, or kind of
archived news clips on the sound video. And sometimes those are video game related. That seems like
there are little historical beats where video games come into the mainstream and that
uses a little video snippet for the channel. Do you have any interaction with those? Or is that
also it's just its own thing? It happens to line up with game stuff? Or how does that work?
It's its own thing. And honestly, the only one that I'm directly involved with is the presentations
on video game stuff. So we used to have a segment which was our favorite acquisitions at the end
of the year. So I always wanted to showcase something from the games collection because it's just
good for people to understand that we do something with video games. I think, yeah,
especially in the Netherlands, most people are like, Oh, yeah, you're at the museum, right? And
they don't know where an archive and be they don't even consider us doing video games. That's
usually a surprise to them. And I would say I'm one of the formerly, I'm the only full time
games archivist in the Netherlands. But also it's very uncommon ground for many people. Like
every time I explain this to people, they're like, Oh, we're doing that in the Netherlands. I'm like,
others are hopefully too on their private collections and stuff, which is great. But formally,
like we do it on an institutional level, which gives us a little bit more weight in that in
that collection debate as well, because there's plenty of private collectors out there that have
a great collection, folks on Dutch, they also publish information, fantastic work. Like I love
seeing that like the moon child example, for example, right? Everyone been talking about moon
child. We have nothing to do with that currently. But also I'm like, yeah, that's good that it's
happening. But we do it on the institutional level. So there's a lot more giant cogs that need to
be set in motion. And so for the publications on the YouTube channel, that's really up to the team.
Sometimes to that team, sometimes they ask me like, Hey, do you have a fun thing like Pokemon is
30 years old? Have you do you know anything in our collection that has to do with Pokemon? I was
like, yeah, this new segment is very fun, where people don't know how to pronounce Pokemon names.
That was so cute. I did catch that. I saw the kids throw in the cards of the wall and I'm like,
yes, that was the one car thing like my girlfriend was like, I never played Pokemon. We were throwing
cards. I'm like, why would you throw the cards? What else would you do with them? What else would
you do with them? The kids are right. It's so funny to see that as well. Yeah, it's great.
Yeah, so on that public side, I don't have a lot to do with the YouTube channel. Again,
that's managed by a different team because our is again, many hats, many different functions.
That was exactly what I was kind of hoping the answer would be, because that makes sense.
Hey, so policies. I can go a little bit over time, by the way, if you're still awake, that is.
Hey, I'll take it. So wanted to know when it comes to collection development policy,
is that a document that gets updated often, or is it kind of settled in its ways, or how do
changes get made to that document? Cool. Yeah, I just sent you the one from 2019,
which is our currently most recent one. The curators are working on the new one, which
should be releasing hopefully later this year, but I'm not part of that.
Every department from the archive gives their input on what should be important,
and many people within the Institute are encouraged to tell like, hey, you should focus on this,
or consider this. In the 2013 version, which is published in English, I think games are not
included. In the 2019 version, we got our own chapter, and I hope that we continue that in
the next version. So it is determined by other, but games are now embedded into our collection
policy. Okay, because that's solid. So now if you're going to have changes made to it,
a lot has happened since 2019 in your role. And so what would it evolve evolving that look like?
Is that trying to like identify like, hey, here's all of the various,
here's the scope of the games, and how it's evolved over time, or how specific do you get?
You're like, hey, by the way, you're going to need a lot of consoles.
So we don't have that issue, thankfully still. I think our collection policy,
when it gets updated, will be inclusive of more. So the 2019 version doesn't even consider the
development materials yet. The 2019 version is really focused on just asking the games and
keeping it at that. And when I got this job that I currently have, like when I changed from the
museum to this, I actually wrote a proposal document to like reinvigorate our games archival
policy, because it was very much like, we do the games, emulation happens, and then, and I was
very much like, okay, this needs to be more structured. So I wrote a proposal, people really like that,
and apparently I can write a proposal. So that's good to know.
And then it was changed, thankfully, by my coordinator, because they know a lot more about
the actual ticket, because I wasn't even working this job yet, so they were very much like,
that's fun that you think about. Here's how it actually worked, which is good to have.
So that has been changed a few times already. I hope that gets encompassed into the new collection
policy, but that includes stuff like the development contextual materials, our recordings of videos,
as well, like that workflow will be more formalized in the next collection policy, I hope.
Additionally, what we kind of want to focus on the overlooked areas of Dutch games history,
because the Netherlands has been varied, like both in productions and stuff that they've worked on.
One of the gaps we discovered over the last year was very much ad for games, advertisements,
games use this advertisement. That is very much something that had a huge explosion here, like
between 2003 and 2008. A lot of games were developed that way, both on commercial level,
but also we've learned through provinces and municipalities made their own game,
so in cage with local communities. Those games are fully lost, and documentation barely exists.
Like we got a guy like Flash games, for example, also fully developed games. So I actually have
a meeting next at the end of the week, next week with someone who worked on a game that was
designed by the province of Ophraisal, and it was about how water usage can be maintained,
and it was like a third-person shooter-ish, where you play with water guns, and it was really
distributed to local schools in the area, but I cannot find a single copy of this online anywhere.
So I'm very curious to ask them, how does this happen, and what is this game? They told me it
still works on modern windows, so that's very interesting against it we play, but no one knows
about this game, so that's very fun. But that's sort of the gaps we're trying to fill, like we might
use them more, one of the considerations I've been told is like maybe we want to use a themed
approach where for one month, one year we focus on just advertising games, the next year we focus
on just applied games, the next year just on X games, right? That just gives me a little bit more
for predictable scope, because out games that are on the canon, and the games that are winning
awards, so we do look for games that have won international or national game awards,
we do want to add those to the collection because they've already got critical and commercial acclaim
in a sense. We kind of want to make sure that we don't just have to wait a year until the
rights hold a response to us, right? There's a lot of downtime in this practically that we kind of
want to move ahead on or keep doing research on, so that themed approach might be really valuable
for us in particular because of that weird, eclectic history of Dutch games.
Okay, this is so helpful. And again, I don't make the policy, so I give my consideration
inputs, but in the end that's with the curators, and it will be published hopefully later this year,
but that's kind of what the things I've been hearing and where I think like yeah, it would
make sense. I also like to keep the door open for when weird stuff comes around,
like I like to ear to the ground where I see, oh, hey, this game does something where we should
probably check it out or someone comes up to me, he's like, hey, did you know that Compina made
a farm fill-like game that ran like five years before Facebook came out, where you could maintain
your own farming village and had to trade with other players online? I'm like, what? No?
Awesome. Awesome. That's the things I'd like to keep an eye out for, right?
Yeah, absolutely. Oh, that's so cool.
So four main questions. So one of the things that I'm running into
is that because I am building a collection development policy for a non-profit that is just
two guys, most of my work with this is not just for the VJF as much as it is for people coming to
the VJF for the users. This is a question of all development policies are not supposed to be for
the end users necessarily, but this is a buffer so that they stop getting so many emails. You
know, there's there's a little bit of weird wiggle room here and it's not something that I can just
give to them and be like, all right, here you go, assuming they'll just run with it or whatever,
it still needs to be, you know, adopted and changed and moved around and all sorts of stuff.
And so I'm setting it up through a GitHub so that they can fork it and then have a place where
they can develop off of it so that it has history attached to it so that they can keep all of their
updates. That's kind of like a change log sort of approach, right? Yeah, just keeping a simple
change log, which I think should also be able to adapt well for users for people because they'll
be able to see, okay, this is the process, how things go in, what they do when they get to the
end state, but then also the main part of like, by the way, we don't have games. This is the
game's history archive, but it doesn't actually provide video games because we can't. We're not
allowed to. Yeah, yeah. So I'm not on site, right? Just for my confirmation, I'm not on site. No,
no, no, as in as in providing video games on site is also not legally allowed for the feature.
No, yeah, they all on site access. That's another fun thing I get to clarify. On site access is
strictly invite only. It's not a public archive on in the physical sense, but the digital library
is publicly accessible to everybody. And so all of those are like weird little pieces to this puzzle
that make this a development policy that people are going to interact with that don't necessarily
know what that is or what it's for. And so yeah, those are the kind of plates that I got. So for
us, occasionally, we get emails for people like, Hey, I have these games, do you want them? And
99% of the time we don't like, again, physical materials rarely have value for us unless we can
use it to sort of as a contextual material, right? Our physical materials are not the carriers,
they're just our physical collection to show like, Hey, this will go on the back of the box,
or this is how this the CD ROM looked, right? So occasionally we say yes to those because they
are we they are gaps in our archive, but we don't need permission from the right tool to
add them to the collection. We just don't make them playable or preserve them for the future,
right? They're just our physical object represented the game until we get permission.
We kind of cut that off right away. We say immediately like, Hey, not our thing. We don't do
this. We are just focused on these materials and developers. And if you have something along those
lines, feel free to reach out. But we do judge it only case by case basis. Now, we are not the
VJF in that the sense that people know that we do this. So we don't get a lot of emails. We get
more slowly, but like, usually it takes, it takes time. And I've done, I've done a presentation in
a YouTube video that went pre that got a lot of you. So people have been knowing to reach us out
via that method, which is really cool. But in the end, like we we we don't have to deal with that
quite yet. And if we do, there's institutional policies on what we can and cannot accept and
how we do that as part of our collection policy as well. Okay, yeah. So really just
a buffer to folks. Yeah, on the website, there's just a big list of like,
here's a form you could fill out with tons and tons of spaces to give a really clear picture of
like what the thing is. Just that is already like way to get rid of 99% of the people who don't
want to fill out a form, just as a sort of guide. So we recently had a project here where we asked
anyone in the Netherlands to donate TV and radio materials. So I was I was safe. But they got
400 people signing up, which is a lot for us to bring stuff for archive. But even more people
came by on the date themselves and like, I have this DVD box of these old television shows and
like, yeah, we already have that in the archive, but DVDs were made using our materials. So we
don't need them. But then still you need to say, yeah, we don't accept this. And but they still
show up, right? There are people who are just that convinced that they have something unique
where we're like, you don't, but you also have to bring that kind of nice term to that. That's
fun. And yeah, for television, like home recording videos and stuff. Yeah, I've learned
learned over the past five years that radio people are much more intense than video game people,
which is very funny to realize. They are really just like, Oh, no, I built this myself. You need
this. You don't have this. It's like, okay. That's very funny. If it were just hand radios, we'd be
saved, but there's like the hearts and everything. It's crazy. And we also have a lot of volunteers
that repair that sort of thing. So there is a sort of always like a sort of feedback loop.
That actually lines up with what Chris Arneil said in Australia about everyone keeps bringing in
their home video of the queen coming to town. Yeah, yeah. And just like, yeah, no, we really
don't need this. Yeah, exactly. And especially because people think, Oh, but then you digitize
it and make a copy for us, right? And like, no, no, we don't do that either. You donated it to the
archive. We are not a, we are a service provider for media professionals. Like, if you want to
have your film digitized for 8K for theater release, we can do that. But that's a cost. And that's
only for media professionals because we don't have the time. And we take very good care of that stuff.
Yeah, it's very specialist work. Like I had a, I was once reached out by someone who had the
original film reels for the Nintendo arcades, like the, the 70s arcade systems. And they asked
like, Hey, can you digitize this? And like, yeah, this is the price. And you would have to know that
we'd take good care of it and you get a digital file. But thanks too much effort. And then you
don't hear back from them. And like, yeah, I get that you can find a better provider in your local
area too, probably. Yeah, this is the same thing the VGHF runs into is lots of folks being like,
Hey, here's this chipset. Here's this ROM. Here's this hardware. Can you take it off a take off a
hands and be send me the digital version is like, okay, a lot of a lot of no here. Yeah.
So another thing with games in particular is like this is Afghan European Federation for
games. Thank you for bringing this up. Yeah, so I'm also elected board member for the Federation.
So I know a lot about the going on. But for us, it's also a way to refer to national collections
from other countries, because in Europe, like, again, a lot of a lot of it gets interchanged. A
lot of it was released maybe by different things. This is kind of a framework of European archives
and museums that have games as part of their policy and are part of this Federation. Non-EU
members can be associative members. So if the VGHF wants to become an associated member,
we would love that. But it's very much designed so that when we get someone who says like,
I have this stack of Polish games, we can refer them to the experts from the gigney in Poland.
So they are much more specialized in that sort of thing in their collections. And every European
country has different deposit laws, like Sweden, for example, has a legal law, but only for physical
games released in Sweden, in Swedish. So as you can imagine, that was a lot in 2000 to 2010,
and then nothing. So that's their struggle. And France, for example, has a legal national deposit
law. Everything that's published in France doesn't matter what goes to the archive. So they get
thousands of games a year, and they don't know what to do with them, because they get thousands of
games a year. And right, we can be more selective because we have a very clear policy. But that's
the struggle of having a national deposit law. And we are working around that with our own
agreements with developers and rights holders. But it takes more time on our end. So it's, you
know, you have to work with what you got. So, okay. And if you watch this really well,
because one of the other things that I'm putting into this policy is, hey, here's all the things
that we don't do. And here's where you go to do that. Exactly. Kind of the same, but without,
since you have the netherland side having being able to point people to all of different European
countries, but you don't have everyone, right? There's like certain, you and this is a sort of
voluntary federation, like you pay membership dues, but not every member every country has their
own archive or is interested. One of the recent members was, for example, a UK company that
does retro game revivals. And they're just like, we support this message. We just want to
make sure that we support this. And if you, if we can be part of this, that's great. So we accept
them too. We have people from the UK and that's both museums and archives and national interests.
Like there's a lot of variety in there. But yeah, there's definitely gaps in the countries that
are part of our group. I don't think we have anyone from Switzerland, for example, just to name something.
Yeah. And they're definitely getting them from there.
I'm pretty sure I needed a double check on this again, because it's going to come up no matter
what. I'm pretty sure currently the digital library is English only, even though I've gotten many
requests at this point to add more languages, because the digital library's OCR is really good.
Yeah. So I love the library on the pjf side. It's great for research.
For us, there's not a lot of value to it, because again, it's so US based and international. So
a lot of the smaller things get overlooked. And here, if there's any publication whatsoever,
it goes through the Royal Archives, the Royal Library. And that can be accessed by anyone,
but you have to go on site. There's no digital archives for that. So that is another barrier of
entry. And we keep a lot of materials here, but we don't digitize them unless there's a project
for it, because that costs money and we just don't have the scanners. And if we have a project for
it, I'm pretty sure my materials are like the bottom of the list, because we have
broadcasting guidebooks that are like 60 years old. Those are a bit more precarious.
Yeah. And that would be tens of thousands of pages.
I'm just thinking of like, if, yeah, if FVMP and VGHF,
if folks in Europe needed those kinds of magazine materials to be digitized, like,
how and VGHF could handle that really well. And that would help everything work.
Yeah. Again, it depends on a per region, per archive, per institute basis. Same with like how
private companies are factored into that as well. Because you are still dealing with copyright.
And for us, at least a here-at-time efficient copyright is still like, it's our baseline. We
cannot go past it. We cannot do anything with it. In Europe, there have been a lot of developments
recently where out of commerce works is a new development. I don't know if you've heard of this.
No. A couple of years ago, the EU passed a law that is allowing archives and museums with their
collections to make materials available if they are no longer sold commercially. And this applies
as long as it's part of the collection. So if you have a material, say, for example, a video
game, you can list it on this portal, which is the out-of-commerce works portal.
A rights holder has six months to respond to that. If they don't, you are allowed to publish it
within a viewing only online material system. And if the rights holder after that six-month
period says, wait, what are you doing? That's my work. You can't put this down. They are not legally
allowed to sue you. So you do not get any recompense, but you have to take it offline because you don't
own it. You're not the rights holder. But it is a way to make your collections more accessible.
And we are currently developing this at Sound Envision. For games, we've put one game through
the portal. It's that MMO it brought up earlier. That is actually now asked through the portal.
So we are legally allowed to keep a working copy of it within our archive and publish about it.
But because games don't have like the radio and television thing where you can press play and
you get the same experience, like we don't know how to build an emulator for this in a web browser,
beyond our scope. But we can use it in our advantage to make sure that the game as part of our collection
is maintained in the playable state. And that's what we really want to leverage.
It's called out of Homer's work. And so one of the things we're doing with that is let me see if I
can find it. Because I don't know if this is actually in English, but we can check. No,
it's not there. So this is in Dutch. What we're releasing in a few months is this hot camera,
the treasure room, as it's called. And this is a free streaming portal where people can watch
anything from the public broadcasters from the last 75 years, which we have leveraged over the
out of Homer's ruling. So we said, hey, all these materials in our archive, it is no longer in
commerce. It was always paid for by taxpayers. So it's regular. We want to publish it again,
because people keep coming here and say like, hey, I want to watch this show. And it's like,
yeah, you can, but only on site. And through this, it will be a free streaming service that anyone
can access in the Netherlands to watch the materials. And they've they attempted to clear
everything with the out of Homer's ruling. It looks like it's planned for the middle of 2026.
Yeah, yeah. A few weeks, I think internally. It's okay. They're keeping a little bit of
lease on that, because they're kind of afraid it will not work outright. But I think at the end of
May, probably it will go live. Congratulations. That's huge. That's great. I'm not involved in
the project, but it's just a very big milestone for our Institute.
For the whole Institute. And it's a very unique European framework, because it applies to every
European country that's a member state. So regardless of if you're in France or in the Netherlands,
as long as it goes through that out of Homer's works portal, you can publish it on your own
things without legal repercussions. Like it's not a it's not a free for all, right? It's not a freebie,
but it is a way to make materials from a collection more accessible, which is, you know, by the end,
you don't want to store it in a vault and have no one see it, right? You want to have people
know that it exists. Yeah. That's right. It might have been very much off topic, but I failed.
That's part of the piece I missed because you have your archive, you have the museum part of
the Institute. And then that sounds like now there's a digital library component that's also going
to be part of everything. And that's the Trinity. That's all of them. That's working on every
cylinder now. That's the idea. Out of commerce work. That's huge. The thing that I've been running
into with America is here video games are software. There's there's no way there's no inroads like
that to even try to preserve games because they are software first, not media first.
And so because they are all policy around it is built like software and software is seen as,
you know, just a bunch of ones and zeros. That's really easy to copy. It means that copyright
holders have just tons of leverage, tons of rights to basically say that nobody can access
these in any way whatsoever. Yeah. And so and so this framework, again, the national copyright
law still provide are still eligible in their own respective countries, but this one is European
white for making sure you're not sued from things you already have in your collection, right? It
has to be in collection. It's just no, you don't become an arcade overnight, right? But it is a
way to make sure people are from. And my suspicion is not a single game rights holder publisher knows
this exists yet. So for now, you can have free reign until it goes horribly wrong and then
probably game companies will be more aware of it. But then still up until that point, there's a
there's another advantage to it for me personally, because we have to strike deals with rights
holders, right? We have to make sure that they agree with us on what we preserve. If you talk
about game development companies from the 90s, they're defunct, they've been absorbed, conglomerate
and whatever, if I go to Microsoft and say, Hey, you made it, you own the rights to a game released
in the 1990s for the Philips CDI. Can we have the rights to it? We're in hill for someone. They're
like, what's hill for some? Can you eat that? That's the that's the issue you run into. And those
games are not commercially available because no one wants to burn their fingers touching it, right?
Or like multiple rights holders, especially. But for us, it's also a challenge for finding
whoever knows about this or is a rights holder still. And this works as a reverse search engine
for us. Like if we put it on the portal, and someone says, I you're not allowed to have this,
I am the rights holder. We're like, OK, prove it to us. And they show it. And we're like, OK,
great, we're taking a flight. No worries. Hi, we would like to archive your work. Can we get
in touch? That's the sort of background idea that I've had using this portal. Like, sure,
making which accessible is the primary goal and will be fantastic and great and useful.
But in the end, I want to make sure that the agreements are of help because that gives us
preservation for the long term. OK. I'm seeing how all of this kind of works together to
make it so you have a lot of range that you get to work with to archive games. It's amazing.
Yeah. Yeah. And it's also for us, mostly a lot of pioneering, right? It's finding stuff,
seeing how it works. And I was like, I spoke with Garrett, a few months back,
and he was like very much when we began our conversation, like, I'd like to thank you guys
because you're kind of also doing this and we're all in this together. I'm like,
why never considered that? But I'm glad to hear it at the very least. Like, again, we've not been
doing this as long as like Australia, for example, they are really ahead of the curve if you ask me.
But also the Australian community is so different from the Netherlands. There's no
there's no equivalent for it. Like we're talking about another continent. Like,
their rules are so on their own. And the same in Japan, where I think the Japan
software preservation group is very much doing good work, but they are running into their own
limitations with copyright. Yeah, they're running into a whole bunch of stuff and
don't necessarily have the resources. Yeah, exactly. She's amazing, but strange and
they also have the same with the VHHF. Like, for me, that's a very much like a wow, it's a
central hub. I'm always miff when when the slogan is like, it's just us like Frank with all due respect.
I know it's just us, but it's also just us in US that then that I'm fine with it. Yeah.
Yeah. And then I'm pretty sure Andrew Borman will knock down your door as well.
I've managed to avoid him thus far. I will. I know that it's super nice.
I would have loved to attend the Save the Game events later this year, but travel to the US is
currently not at the fight. Yep, I don't recommend it. I don't know. I know. I wish it was a digital
symposium because I would have loved to show everyone what we're doing. But yeah,
yeah. We are looking at FM to try to see if we can organize something in Europe on a similar
scale to bring all the European archives together. But that getting funding for that is very hard.
We need we don't need a lot of money, but we do need money. Let's say the game's EU. That'd be great.
Yeah, pretty much. Yeah. Yeah, that would be if I get to go to that in Rochester, that'd be the
first time that I've ever been. I'm I'm hoping that it was. Chris said the same thing. Chris was
like, you have to go to that. Yeah. I'm like, I'll figure out a way to New York, I guess. Yeah.
All right. Do you have any other questions? Can I help you?
That's everything. If I think of anything else, I can always email you.
Reach out email. My socials are in the emails. Well, like reach out whatever you like.
Oh, much. This is amazing. Yeah. And if I if you need something to clarify as well,
let us know. And again, if you're ever back in the Netherlands, let me know. Like, I would
love to show you around here. There's a lot of fun things to see. There's there's so many things
that I didn't. That was I was only there for a month. It was very when we were here again,
when it was last summer. Oh, really? Oh, wow. Big 250. Oh, man. And that was it. That was a
wild time to be in the Netherlands. Yeah, absolutely. Oh, man. But yeah, no, we managed to go kind of
all over that lake, just just the western side of the Netherlands. How hard did we go south?
We went at least all the way down to Rotterdam. Yeah, yeah. And what did the part to a whole
bunch of? Yeah, good stuff. It was really cool. Actually, there's two afterling video games.
I'm still trying to get worked on. Like, yeah, that's our a sorry licensed afterling tycoon,
I think, which is like a roller coaster tycoon thing, but for afterling, it was not good. But
I know Atari still has the rights. Huh, until this moment, I never considered other like,
I'm so used to the Disneyland video game that has been made like a hundred times.
Yeah, I'd not consider that other theme parks might have their own video games at this point.
There's a the one that was actually good was a lego land video game where you manage a lego
land theme park. Exactly. That was pretty nice. Yeah.
Well, that's amazing because then that would actually that would have information for what
afterling was like during that era too. Pretty 2000s. Yeah. That's so fun. All right. I could
talk forever. I would love to say the same. Anytime you want to talk about the stuff, I love it.
It's so exciting. Yeah. And I don't know where I've got like six, seven weeks left in this
program. And then I have an MLIS and have no idea what to put it on. But I'm going to force
a lot of conversations about games, games, librarianship, which is not quite games preservation. There's
a little little niche in there. It's because I've gotten to see so many amazing projects
that are all in conversation with each other in ways that you work with with F-GAMP and how
that stretches out to so many different institutions. And then there's a hub for reaching out to other
entire continents is is amazing. Yeah. If you if you need if you have a request for F-GEM members,
like you want to talk to more of the European side because I'm only sharing our perspective.
There's a different perspective if you talk to the people in Germany, in UK, in France.
We have a large network like if you seriously want to talk to someone one of our other board
members is from GOG as well might be interesting. It would be very interesting. And the Embracer
Game Archive is also interesting for their physical collection. They are very approachable.
I would love to talk about to is there a librarian at the Embracer? Yes. I know I know them both very
well. Natalia and her husband, Juka, they're very nice. Yeah. I would love to talk to them.
Because I'm going to talk to a couple of in industry librarians. I got and talked to Blizzard
Archives, which was an amazing conversation. But talking to Embracer, that's a whole different
world with tons of cool opportunities and stuff. And they have a very weird job.
They are also very weird because they are technically a privately owned archive in that sense.
But also because they're CEO, Las Vingfoss is just such an enthusiast about games preservation
in that sense. Here's 4 million euro buying me an archive. That's pretty much what happened.
And then they hired people who worked. So Natalia, her background is actually a municipal archive.
So she has a very dedicated history in formal archives, but games have always been her passion.
So she was ideal for that. I can easily get you in touch with her. She's really nice.
Just send me an email and I'll introduce you. That would be a whole wild perspective that I would
die for. That would be awesome. Because I've been trying to figure this out.
Publisher-based archives. There's just a lot of indie publishers that have been
agglomerating in the US and all over the place. And they are becoming very quickly a target of
preservation archive aims like, all right, what are you all doing? That's very interesting to work
on this stuff. Because they just have they happen to start. They're being big enough to be hubs
for a lot of different work. And sometimes it's localized by a location. Other times it's
localized by just like, yeah, we've been working for the last five years. So we have this five-year
era that's just, that's our stuff. Yeah, we have that for the Dutch Games Garden,
which was the industry hub in the Netherlands, where a lot of the people got started and it was
founded back in 2008. And it got defunct last year. So we have their archive from 2008 to 2025,
which is just more so representative of the Dutch ecosystem and the people that were incubated
there, but also how they made their game. So Flumber got started there. Ronimo game,
who did awesome knots and the original guys from Blub. There's a lot of like people there that
grew up in that ecosystem and then made games out of the young who made hidden folks as well.
Like there's a lot of documentation on that as well, like, especially how they run that incubator.
Yep, that's amazing. Cool stuff. Yeah, I know the questions. I would love to
chat with anyone else. I'd just be happy to keep these conversations going just because I think
this is so much. Yeah, just be careful. You don't drown in them because there's a lot of us still
out there. Like often disregarded six weeks. Yeah, we're all being experienced at talking now
because of the whole stop killing games thing, which is also playing in the background. Oh my god,
we're talking about stop killing games. We are not involved in it. And they are approaching it
from a consumer advocacy side. So we have nothing much to add to it, though we are very much like
waving the flag of like, Hey, games are culture approached in this cultural heritage, not as
consumer products for preservation purposes. Yeah, no, that that's another
old arm. I'm not a can of worms entirely. No, I can't worms, but it overlaps with the
game's advocacy of preservation in a weird way. And oh my god. Yeah, and it's for nowadays,
and really much like thing, but then it got grounds of the UK and oh my god,
yeah, that was that was a yep, games are an international community. Very much so,
yeah, every car and a lot of gamers and a lot of gamers realizing oh wait,
our country has different laws than the US. Like fair trade is fair. Fair use is not a thing
here. Please don't think that you can just use anything. It's it doesn't exist.
Because yeah, DMCA and fair uses are only defense in the US. Yeah, yeah, and again,
and we are we are screwed by DMCA, but fair use, we don't get the profit off off. So we're like,
yeah, great. Thank you ads. Hello. Awesome. No, that's so funny. Yeah, I'm a lot of questions and
it was the funniest thing immediately. So one of the I do live streams, one of the live streams
that I do is I do a weekly point and click. Sweet two months after I get back from the Netherlands.
I am shown Rusty Lake. I'm shown Rusty Lake Gapes and I'm like,
awesome. And I literally last Tuesday, I finished Mr. Rabbit's Magic. So I finished their last,
their newest one. Very good. Holy. If you're if you're back there again,
their offices are in Amsterdam and they have our in office escape room. If you come by the
office, they have a little escape room for everyone. It's very funny. No, you know what?
I'm not going. I'm not. No, not going back or just just planning that seat. All right.
I tell my discord and they're going to be very mad. Yeah, it's very, very awesome.
They're great, they're great, they're great people though. We've loved working with them.
It's great. Awesome. Cool. If you need anything, give a yell and I wish you a very pleasant evening
and I hope you get some sleep. I'm from Seattle. It's April the 20th.
It's a national holiday for me. Oh, really? I didn't know where. Oh, yeah. No, it's it's a it's
a green holiday for us in Seattle and the Emerald City and I've got a lot of substance to celebrate
with. So good. Sounds great. I don't have class on Monday. So I'll good day for me. Even better,
perfect. They are prepared. All right, great. Thanks.
Bye.